---
title: 'Sia Load Test Result 1: Worst-Case Scenario'
layout: post
date: '2018-03-11'
summary: How many files can Sia handle?
tags:
- sia
- load test
permalink: "/load-test-1/"
comments: true
---

Last month, I [announced](/sia-load-test-preview/) the first ever load test of Sia. The load test consists of three distinct Sia test cases:

1. Worst-case scenario (this report)
2. Real data scenario
3. Best-case scenario

Today, I'd like to share the result of the first test case, the worst-case scenario. I uploaded thousands of 1-byte files to Sia.

This test case is meant to capture the lower-bound of Sia's performance. Because Sia splits files into ~40 MiB chunks, each 1-byte file requires ~40 MiB of overhead.

## Cutting the test short

I decided to cut this test case short at around the 25-day mark even though the test had not met any of the  test plan's exit conditions. At the rate it was going, it could have taken months to complete.

For the remaining two test cases, I'm adding an additional exit criteria to keep tests from running forever: the maximum runtime is 14 days.

## Results summary

| Metric | Value |
|---------|---------|
| Total uploaded | 47.2 KiB (file data)<br />9.8 TiB (absolute) |
| Storage efficiency | 0.0000004470% |
| Total files uploaded | 48,358 |
| Total file contracts created | 60 |
| Total spent | 3625 SC<br />$50.75\* |
| $ per TB/month | $350 million (yes, really)\*\* |
| Total test time | 596.8 hours (24.9 days) |
| Average upload bandwidth | 0.00000018 Mbps (file data)<br />40.3 Mbps (absolute) |
| Final contract count | 60 |
| Sia crashes | 0 |

\* Using the 2018-03-11 price of 1.4 cents per SC. Assumes that unused renter funds will successfully return to the test wallet at the conclusion of the renter contracts.

\*\* Cost per TB is ludicrously high because this particular test case optimizes for high file count at the expense of efficient storage.

## File bytes vs. absolute bytes

On Amazon S3 or Google Cloud Storage, costs and performance are fairly straightforward. If you upload a 5 GB file, you pay for 5 GB of upload bandwidth and 5 GB of storage for every hour the provider keeps your file. Any work the provider does to repackage or replicate the file is abstracted from the user

Sia is more complicated because the software responsible for packaging and replicating data is on the user's side, not on the server's side, as with traditional cloud providers. This has the benefit of giving the user more power and the downside of convoluting the mechanics and obfuscating costs.

If you upload a 5 GB file to Sia, you don't pay exactly 5 GB of upload bandwidth or 5 GB for storage costs. Instead, Sia repackages your files into equally sized chunks and uploads the data multiple times to different hosts.

Sia's performance is rooted in two metrics. The first is the size of your data. If you have five files of 100 GB each, then the total data you're uploading to Sia is 500 GB. The second is the amount of data
On Sia, the calculation is more complicated.

To avoid ambiguity, I introduce two terms for distinguishing between these metrics: file bytes and absolute bytes.

**File bytes** is the total size of the data that you'

**Absolute bytes** is the total amount of data Sia uploads to hosts, including Sia metadata, file padding, and redundant copies of the data.

## File data bandwidth vs. absolute bandwidth

Because of the distinction between file bytes and absolute bytes, I need a similar semantics to clarify bandwidth metrics.

The simplest way to explain the difference between file data bandwidth and absolute bandwidth is through an example.

1. User upload a 100 MB file to Sia
1. Sia breaks this file into three equal-sized chunks of ~42 MB each, totalling ~126 MB.
1. Sia uploads each chunk to three different hosts.
1. Upload completes after 10 seconds.

The file data bandwidth is simply the size of the file divided by the upload duration:

```
= 100 MB / 10 seconds
= 800 Mb / 10 seconds
= 80 Mbps
```

The absolute bandwidth is the total amount of data transferred divided by the upload duration:

```
= ((42 MB * 3 chunks) * 3 hosts) / 10 seconds
= ((126 MB) * 3 hosts) / 10 seconds
= 378 MB / 10 seconds
= 3024 Mb / 10 seconds
= 302.4 Mbps
```

## File data bandwidth is what matters

If you have 50 TB of data to upload to Sia, the question you're asking is, "How long will it take Sia to upload this data?" That's the file data bandwidth.

The absolute data bandwidth is useful to Sia developers in guiding how they design their upload algorithms, but it is not meaninful for actual users.

If you have 100 MB of data, and I tell you that Sia's upload bandwidth for file data is 80 Mbps, then you know that you can upload that data in about 10 seconds.

Absolute data bandwidth is a metric that's helpful in guiding Sia developers to design the upload system, but is not a metric that's actually useful to users. If you have 100 MB of data, and I tell you that Sia's absolute data bandwidth is 80 Mbps, it's impossible for you to calculate how long

## Efficiency

Sia differs from traditional cloud storage providers in that the cost to the user depends on how efficienty Sia stores their files. Under optimal efficiency, Sia uploads each byte of data exactly once per degree of replication. So if you're using Sia's default redundancy of 3x, uploading a 5 GB file would ideally cost you 15 GB for upload and 15 GB for storage.

In practice, Sia can't achieve its optimal efficiency due to two main factors: file padding and bad hosts. 

Sia breaks files into equal chunks of ~40 MiB. For files not perfectly divisible by the chunk size, Sia pads the last chunk so that it will fill the full ~40 MiB size. This is why thousands of 1-byte files are Sia's worst-case scenario: each chunk only contains a single byte of actual data and ~40 MiB of padding.

Bad hosts also drive up costs for the user. If you upload a 5 GB file to a host, then that host goes offline, you lose the money you gave to that host and you have to spend more money uploading the data to a new host to get back to 3x replication.

My expectation for this test was that Sia would require about 120 MiB (40 MiB x 3x redundancy) of costs to upload each 1-byte file. Instead, Sia consumed 213 MiB worth of costs to upload each file, for a overhead : data ratio of 220 million to one.

{% include image.html file="storage-efficiency.png" alt="Graph of storage efficiency over time" fig_caption="Sia 1.3.1 Load Test&#58; Worst-Case - Storage efficiency" img_link="true" %}

It looks like Sia used a [much higher replication](https://github.com/NebulousLabs/Sia/issues/2813#issuecomment-372144990) than it should have. Instead of the 3x replication that I expected, Sia uploaded most files to 5.3x redundancy. One file was uploaded with 11.3x redundancy. I suspect this is due to bugs in Sia because it's very unlikely that so many of hosts went offline in a matter of weeks.

## Cost

The cost per TB per month was, as mentioned above, $350 **million**. This is funny, but not surprising given that this test case measures Sia's performance on its worst-case input. The overhead of Sia was 220 million to one. In other words, to store each 1-byte file, Sia uploaded 213.3 MiB of data.

It's a  It would actually be impossible to even upload 1 TB of 1-byte files to Sia because the cost would be around 75 billion Siacoins, which is almost three times larger than the total number fo Siacoins in circulation.

**XX% of costs were due to bugs in Sia**. Interestingly, most of the costs in this test case were actually due to Sia bugs. I estimate that they accounted for XX% of the 3625 SC spent in this test.

The biggest loss came from [bug #2772](https://github.com/NebulousLabs/Sia/issues/2772), which I discovered in a [previous post](/sia-metrics-collector/#incorrect-funds-balance). This bug caused a loss of 2,033.3 SC, which accounts for a whopping 56.1% of the total amount spent in the course of the test.

The biggest source of loss is due to , which I reported during development of the load testing software. As a Sia user spends money on contracts, their money should flow from their wallet's available balance to their renter's total contract spending. This is sort of like moving money from your savings account to your checking account. If you have $5000 in savings and transfer $100 to checking, the total value of both accounts should remain a fixed $5000.

Imagine that you wished to make a business deal with a person named Bob. You don't know Bob, but you and Bob both trust your friend Shelly to act as the neutral third party. Shelly will take money out of your bank account to hold for Bob and she will hand it over to Bob when he delivers his part of the deal. Until Shelly pays Bob, the am

{% include image.html file="funds-balance.png" alt="Graph of renter funds balance over time" fig_caption="Sia 1.3.1 Load Test&#58; Worst-case - Funds split between wallet balance and total contract spending" img_link="true" %}

When I shared this result previously, some readers asked whether this loss was simply due to contract fees. It's a reasonable question, but the answer is no. Total contract spending includes contract fees, so the sum of wallet balance and total contract spending should remain constant for the lifetime of the contracts.

Sia also lost money due to [poor contract management](https://github.com/NebulousLabs/Sia/issues/2769), which I've reported prevously, but this case showed a particularly flagrant example.

{% include image.html file="renter-spending.png" alt="Graph of renter spending over time" fig_caption="Sia 1.3.1 Load Test&#58; Worst-case - Renter spending" img_link="true" %}

The purple line shows the amount remaining in Sia's storage contracts still available for upload, download, and storage. In theory, Sia shouldn't form new contracts until this line reaches near zero, but throughout the test, Sia purchases new contracts even with ~1000 SC left in unused renter spending. Perhaps this is Sia just trying to keep at least 50 good contracts at all times as it discovers which of its original contract set contracts are bad.

The graph shows something interesting around the 400 hour mark. Until that point, Sia has 1,766.7 SC in wallet balance that it has not allocated to contracts. All of a sudden, it spends all of its remaining wallet balance on new contracts. In doing so, Sia lost 69.3 SC in contract fees.

I thought perhaps this was just Sia planning ahead and renewing its contracts, but that doesn't seem to be the case. The `/renter/contracts` API showed that contracts began at block 141743 with a renew window of 6480, meaning that contract renewal should happen at block 148223, which hasn't happened yet.

```json
{
    "currentperiod": 141743,
		...
    "settings": {
        "allowance": {
            "funds": "5000000000000000000000000000",
            "hosts": 50,
            "period": 12960,
            "renewwindow": 6480
        }
    }
}
```

## Upload bandwidth



The test uploaded 47.2 KiB of file data in 596.8 hours. That's equivalent to an upload bandwidth of 1.8 x 10<sup>-7</sup> Mbps, which is insanely slow, but that's expected for this test of worst-case performance.

In this test, most of the data uploaded was actually padding to bring the 1-byte test files up to Sia's minimum data chunk size of ~40 MiB. Including padding, Sia uploaded 9.8 TiB, equivalent to 40.3 Mbps upload bandwidth.

The graphs below show Sia's total bandwidth over time:

{% include image.html file="upload-bandwidth-file-data.png" alt="Graph of upload bandwidth over time" fig_caption="Sia 1.3.1 Load Test&#58; Worst-case - Upload bandwidth (File data)" img_link="true" %}

{% include image.html file="upload-bandwidth-absolute.png" alt="Graph of upload bandwidth over time" fig_caption="Sia 1.3.1 Load Test&#58; Worst-case - Upload bandwidth (Absolute)" img_link="true" %}

This load test is explicitly non-rigorous for measuring bandwidth, as I ran the test on my home FiOS connection while using the Internet for my normal daily activities. I derived bandwidth from Sia's own reported metrics, which are imprecise due to effects of API latency (I'll discuss this more below). That said, we can still make interesting observations about the upload bandwidth.

**Upload bandwidth declines rapidly as more data is uploaded**. Sia reached 200 Mbps for the first few hours, then rapidly declined to an average of ~50 Mbps. As the test continued, the average continued dropping until it was running at ~8 Mbps in the last few days of the test.

**Upload bandwidth is bursty**. The graph shows a declining curve with intermittent spikes. Some measurements reached as high as 600 Mbps, which I think is measurement error due to API latency effects (discussed below). The 60-minute moving average, represented by the green line is more credible, as it shows uploads reaching bandwidths of 100 Mbps and above for brief periods of a few hours.

Bursts are also visible in the graph of absolute bytes uploaded over time. The total data uploaded shows a mix of smooth curves and steep jumps when the upload bandwidth rapidly increases.

{% include image.html file="upload-data.png" alt="Graph of renter funds balance over time" fig_caption="Sia 1.3.1 Load Test&#58; Worst-case - Total contract size" img_link="true" %}

## API latency

{% include image.html file="api-latency.png" alt="Graph of API latency over time" fig_caption="Sia 1.3.1 Load Test&#58; Worst-case - API Latency" img_link="true" %}

Sia has notably bad latency, sometimes taking as many as seven minutes to gather metrics from the three APIs that [sia_metrics_collector](https://github.com/mtlynch/sia_metrics_collector) polls:

* `/renter/contracts`
* `/renter/files`
* `/wallet`

I don't have latency data at the granularity of each API call, but I suspect most of the latency is coming from the `/renter/files` API.

**API latency grows linearly**. I don't have enough data to say whether API latency is a function of number of files, total data size, or contract duration.

**Bandwidth bursts are correlated with bursts in API latency**. Interestingly, the graph shows several "bursts" of high latency. I thought at first that 

{% include image.html file="api-latency-vs-bandwidth.png" alt="Graph of API latency vs. bandwidth over time" fig_caption="Sia 1.3.1 Load Test&#58; Worst-case - API Latency vs. Bandwidth (Absolute)" img_link="true" %}

## Raw Data

* [Logs](https://gist.github.com/mtlynch/7726468eca7ffef0ff6ac9370b05024e)
* [Metrics](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1x4AVo3Oyw6eoqJqnsHtDi_C6pjvD0xwpybxElx39-bM/edit?usp=sharing)

## Test notes

* There were two times during the test that the metrics collector crashed, so metrics are missing for a few hours in those chunks.
* I started collecting metrics every 60 seconds, but as the API latency increased, I decreased the frequency of metrics collection more and more to a maximum of once per 5 minutes.

## Reproducing Results

All steps to reproduce these results are available in the [sia_load_tester](https://github.com/mtlynch/sia_load_tester/blob/2802acc77d6651bec88cf954c5240197bc6d9627/README.md) README.